pages/note/finance-and-capital-markets-khan-academy.mdx, before:

---
title: Notes on Finance and capital markets, A class from khan academy
publishedAt: "2021-01-21"
tags:
    - economics
    - khan-academy
authors:
    - Bharat Kalluri
---

The initial ideas as of now seem easy since I have already picked them up at school, but its worth revising.

> Most of the code in quotes is basic python.

## Compound interest

-   Simple interest means you earn interest on the invested amount. So for example, Let us say the amount invested is 100
    and the interest is 10% per year. After one year you will have 110 and after one more year you will have 120, since
    the interest is on invested amount. Compound interest on the other hand is on the amount (immaterial of the invested
    amount),so the same example with 10% compounding interest per year would be. `100 + (100*0.1) == 110` after one
    year, and in the second year it will be `110 + (110*0.1) == 121` which can also be written as
    `(100 + (100*0.1)) + ((100 + (100*0.1)) * 0.1) == 110`.
-   The pattern here is: if the initial amount is a, and interest is i. Then amount earned after one unit of time(could be
    month/year/day etc..) is `a + (a*i)` => `a*(1+i)`. Now for the next unit of time, `(a*(1+i)) + ((a*(1+i))*i)` =>
    `a*(1+i)*(1+i)` => `a*((1+i)**2)`. Cool, here is the pattern now. Let us say `n` is the number `a*((1+i)**n)`. So
    plug in `a=1000`, `i=0.1` and `n=5`, then the amount would be `1610.51`.

Commit message:

Added notes on simple interest

pages/note/finance-and-capital-markets-khan-academy.mdx, after:

---
title: Notes on Finance and capital markets, A class from khan academy
publishedAt: "2020-01-21"
tags:
    - economics
    - khan-academy
authors:
    - Bharat Kalluri
---

The initial ideas as of now seem easy since I have already picked them up at school, but its worth revising.

> Most of the code in quotes is basic python.

## Compound interest

-   Simple interest means you earn interest on the invested amount. So for example, Let us say the amount invested is 100
    and the interest is 10% per year. After one year you will have 110 and after one more year you will have 120, since
    the interest is on invested amount. Compound interest on the other hand is on the amount (immaterial of the invested
    amount),so the same example with 10% compounding interest per year would be. `100 + (100*0.1) == 110` after one
    year, and in the second year it will be `110 + (110*0.1) == 121` which can also be written as
    `(100 + (100*0.1)) + ((100 + (100*0.1)) * 0.1) == 110`.
-   The pattern here is: if the initial amount is a, and interest is i. Then amount earned after one unit of time(could be
    month/year/day etc..) is `a + (a*i)` => `a*(1+i)`. Now for the next unit of time, `(a*(1+i)) + ((a*(1+i))*i)` =>
    `a*(1+i)*(1+i)` => `a*((1+i)**2)`. Cool, here is the pattern now. Let us say `n` is the number `a*((1+i)**n)`. So
    plug in `a=1000`, `i=0.1` and `n=5`, then the amount would be `1610.51`.

## Rule of 72

-   If the question is, how much time does it take to double the amount if the interest is a compound interest of 10%.
    Then, the rule of 72 says that you can do `(72*0.1) == 7.2`. ie. it takes 7.2 years for the amount to double.
-   Now the question is, how did we arrive at this number. 72. I think to clearly understand this, a good understand of
    logarithms is needed. [Helper link](https://betterexplained.com/articles/the-rule-of-72/)
-   Its very interesting to see how much each percentage of compound interest affects the doubling time. With 1% compound
    interest per year, it would take 72 years for your money to double. At 2%, its 36. At 3%, its 34. And at 5%, its 14!
    I think compounding is one such concept for which its harder to develop intuition and its very important to do that
    math to compare options.

## Simple interest

-   A simpler idea and a simpler formula. The idea is that you pay interest on the initial principle. Which means if you
    borrow 100 and for a 10% simple interest. Then, after one unit of time, say an year. 110 should be payed back. After two
    years, 120 should be paid back.
-   So as you can notice, the formula ends up being `a+(n*i*a)` which is the same as `a*(1+n*i)`
