posts/why-logs-and-exponents.mdx, before:

---
title: What is the point of logarithms?
publishedAt: '2023-12-21'
---

Before we get into logs, let's wrap our head around exponents.

# On exponents


Question: If a lake has a flower, and the flower doubles every day. And the lake is full of flowers on day 10. When did the lake have half the flowers?

.

.

.

If you have answered 9, you are right! The number of flowers to exist would be 1024 on the 10th day and 256 on the ninth day. (progression: `[1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 1024]`)

The way to calculate growth rate is also fascinating. The formulae for calculation is

```python
import math
# growth_rate being 0 to 1, where 1 is 100%
growth_rate = 1
# t being the time interval we want to get value for
t = 10
# starting point of the growth
initial_value = 1

value_at_time_t = initial_value * math.pow(
    (1+growth_rate)
, t)
```

As you can see, exponential scales are massive. With the same scale, the 15th value is 32768 & the 20th value is 1073741824.

In nature, a lot of scales are actually exponential.

- Disease spread (like covid) is exponential in nature, if the curve is not controlled well
- In a controlled environment & natural conditions, the population of a species is usually exponential.
- Compound interest follows the exponential scale, hence it is tough to get in control

So when there is a growth rate, the only way to predict or assess the curve is by using an exponential scale. But dealing with ridiculously large numbers is extremely hard.

## The log scale

Hence, if we flip the equation. We can effectively communicate data in a compressed format. This is called the `log scale`.

Let's take the same example as above

```python
[int(math.pow(2, i)) for i in range(1, 10)]
[2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]
```

```python
[int(math.log(i, 2)) for i in [math.pow(2, i) for i in range(1, 10)]]
# [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
```

Instead of saying 1073741824 (2 ^ 15, or the state at 15th day with a growth rate of 100% starting with 2 on the first day), we can instead say 15 on log scale with a base of two.

That is saying, how many 2's does it take to multiple to make 1073741824. That is what a log is.

Apart from this neat data compression feature, logs make it extremely easy to perform math with large numbers given its properties.

### Usage in the real world

- Earthquakes are measured in the Richter scale, this is the log scale. On the Richter scale, each whole number increase represents a tenfold increase in amplitude of seismic waves and approximately 31.6 times more energy release.
- Human hearing does not respond linearly to sound intensity, it is more closely related to the log of physical intensity. So decibel (dB) scale is logarithmic.
- many more scales like acidity etc.. are also log scales.

Commit message:

some more changes
Signed-off-by: Bharat Kalluri <bharatkalluri@protonmail.com>

posts/why-logs-and-exponents.mdx, after:

---
title: What is the point of logarithms?
publishedAt: '2023-12-21'
---

Before we get into logs, let's wrap our head around exponents.

# On exponents


Question: If a lake has a flower, and the flower doubles every day. And the lake is full of flowers on day 10. When did the lake have half the flowers?

.

.

.

If you have answered 9, you are right! The number of flowers to exist would be 1024 on the 10th day and 256 on the ninth day. (progression: `[1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 1024]`)

The way to calculate growth rate is also fascinating. The formulae for calculation is

```python
import math
# growth_rate being 0 to 1, where 1 is 100%
growth_rate = 1
# t being the time interval we want to get value for
t = 10
# starting point of the growth
initial_value = 1

value_at_time_t = initial_value * math.pow(
    (1+growth_rate)
, t)
```

As you can see, exponential scales are massive. With the same scale, the 15th value is 32768 & the 20th value is 1073741824.

In nature, a lot of scales are actually exponential.

- Disease spread (like covid) is exponential in nature, if the curve is not controlled well
- In a controlled environment & natural conditions, the population of a species is usually exponential.
- Compound interest follows the exponential scale, hence it is tough to get in control

So when there is a growth rate, the only way to predict or assess the curve is by using an exponential scale. But dealing with ridiculously large numbers is extremely hard.

## The log scale

Hence, if we flip the equation. We can effectively communicate data in a compressed format. This is called the `log scale`.

Let's take the same example as above

```python
[int(math.pow(2, i)) for i in range(1, 10)]
# [2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512]
```

```python
[int(math.log(i, 2)) for i in [math.pow(2, i) for i in range(1, 10)]]
# [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9]
```

Instead of saying 1073741824 (2 ^ 15, or the state at 15th day with a growth rate of 100% starting with 2 on the first day), we can instead say 15 on log scale with a base of two.

That is saying, how many 2's does it take to multiple to make 1073741824. It takes 15 2's to be multiplied, That is what a log is.

Apart from this neat data compression feature, logs make it extremely easy to perform math with large numbers given its properties. Checkout 3blue1browns [video on logs](https://www.youtube.com/live/cEvgcoyZvB4) to explore more of its properties.

### Usage in the real world

- Earthquakes are measured in the Richter scale, this is the log scale. On the Richter scale, each whole number increase represents a tenfold increase in amplitude of seismic waves and approximately 31.6 times more energy release.
- Human hearing does not respond linearly to sound intensity, it is more closely related to the log of physical intensity. So decibel (dB) scale is logarithmic.
- many more scales like acidity etc.. are also log scales.
